MIT News Office
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Room 11-400
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139-4307
Phone: 617-253-2700
http://web.mit.edu/newsoffice/www

==================================================
MIT students launch campus-wide electronic music library
==================================================

* Library provides free on-demand immediate access to thousands of
   classical and contemporary CDs to students, faculty, staff

* MIT to publish open system software and design for
   implementation at other universities

For Immediate Release
MONDAY, October 27, 2003
Contact: Kristen Collins, MIT News Office
Phone: 617-258-5403
E-mail: kristenc@mit.edu

CAMBRIDGE, Mass. Two students at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
today unveiled a campus-wide electronic music library that will provide 
students, faculty and staff with on-demand access to thousands of classical 
and contemporary recordings from many areas on MIT's campus, including 
student dormitory rooms and faculty offices. They plan to make the software 
that drives the library available to other universities as open-source 
software.

The new campus-wide music library, known as the Library Access to Music 
Project or LAMP (http://lamp.mit.edu), grew out of the students' two-year 
research project to come up with a fully-licensed program for on-demand 
listening.

LAMP provides access to 3,500 contemporary and classical CDs and was 
created by Keith Winstein, 22, a graduate student in electrical engineering 
and computer science, and Josh Mandel, 21, a junior in the same major. The 
two students wanted to find a free, legal way for students to listen to 
their favorite CD when and where they wanted, without requiring a trip to 
the library.

"Traditional music libraries are great, but you have to be willing to go to 
the campus library and check out a CD," said Winstein. "We wanted to be as 
convenient as possible, and that means letting patrons listen to CDs easily 
and immediately.

The challenge for the students was figuring out how to offer an 
instantly-accessible, campus-wide, on-demand music library without breaking 
the copyright law.

Instead of using the Internet or MIT's internal network to transmit music 
to listeners, Winstein and Mandel turned to MIT's analog closed-circuit 
cable television system. The LAMP system lets listeners hear the CD, but 
not download or copy it. Because it is impossible to record exact copies of 
CDs from a non-digital source, the licensing requirements are similar to 
the requirements for radio stations.

MIT, like most universities and radio stations, pays for blanket licenses 
from the three organizations -- ASCAP, BMI, and SESAC -- that have the 
power to authorize analog public performances of virtually all songs. The 
"analog" licenses are available at a reasonable cost to the university. 
Estimated costs of licenses for unlimited digital transmissions would be 
much higher.

MIT students, faculty and staff can choose music at LAMPs Web page by 
selecting a CD or song. Songs play directly to listeners' stereos and 
televisions through the LAMP system. A listener can pause, rewind and 
fast-forward the song or CD using the Web-based control system. The sound 
is better than broadcast FM radio, but not as high quality as a CD played 
on a home stereo.

Winstein and Mandel set up a year-long online survey to collect a "wish 
list" of CDs students wanted them to buy. By the time the survey closed, 
700 students had submitted 3,500 CDs. "We ended up buying them all," said 
Mandel. In the next year, Winstein and Mandel hope to expand the library's 
collection to 7,000 CDs.

Winstein and Mandel will also publish the design and software driving LAMP 
as "open-source," available to be freely implemented elsewhere, especially 
at other universities. Winstein estimates the cost for another university 
to replicate LAMP at about $10,000 in off-the-shelf equipment, plus $25,000 
to buy the CD collection. The total recurring cost is about 60 cents per 
student per year for licenses from ASCAP, BMI, and SESAC.

The LAMP project was supervised by Professor of Computer Science and 
Engineering Hal Abelson, and funded by the iCampus research alliance 
between MIT and Microsoft Research, which endows faculty and student 
projects to enhance university education through information technology.

About iCampus

iCampus, the MIT-Microsoft Alliance, is a 5-year, $25 million initiative to 
improve the quality of higher education through a combination of 
information technology tools and innovative teaching methods. MIT 
researchers and Microsoft software engineers are working together to enable 
a host of cutting edge technologies -- wireless, streaming video, 
collaborative software, simulation, virtual reality, and more to facilitate 
the delivery of engaging, interactive, team-based, project-oriented, 
hands-on, and student-driven learning experiences. Learn more at 
web.mit.edu/icampus.
